---
layout: post
title:  "LaZer Tag"
date:   2018-12-22 00:00:00 -0000
categories: unity
tags:
    - unity
    - game
    - multiplayer
    - c#
featured_img: /assets/images/lazertag.jpg
---

LaZer Tag was my first _finished_ multiplayer Unity game. It used unity's old networking system, which was a pain to work with, but I managed to get it working. It was a simple game, but it was a lot of fun to play with friends. I learned a lot about networking and multiplayer game design from this project.

Mechanics:
* Players can move around the map and shoot lasers at each other.
* The blue regions are mirrors, and players can bounce lasers off of them to reach other players that are behind cover.
* When hit, the attacker receives a point, and you respawn randomly in the map.
* There are floating platforms, and if you fall off the map, you lose all your points and respawn.
* The first player to 40 points wins.
* When any player first reaches 30 points, a cool vfx is played and the music changes to a more intense track.

What I learned:
* How to use Unity's old networking system.
* A lot about raycasting and how to use it to detect collisions.
* How to use line renderers (to render the laser)
* What billboards were, how to use them, and how to implement them myself. (ie simple look-at script)
* How to use Unity's particle system.

What I would do differently (today):
* I would use Unity's new networking system, which is much easier to use.
* I would tweak the movement system to be more snappy and less velocity-based.
* I would improve the UI, and add a lobby system.
* I would add more maps, and make the maps more interesting, including dynamic cover.